# Syllabificator

Library and tool for syllabifying Dutch words and analysing output from different syllabification algorithms.

## Usage
### General Description

Syllabificator is a tool for syllabifying words, meaning to split **words** into **ph-ne-tic** **com-pli-ant** **syl-la-bles**. It works
by directly employing algorithms from external libraries (like Pyphen) supplemented with implementations of algorithms manually coded.
There are currently three different algorithm that the tool supports:

| Algorithm   | Type          |
|-------------|---------------|
| Brandt      | Linguistic    |
| Liang       | Algorithmic   |
| Weijters    | Lookup-based  |

Syllabificator requires the following libraries to operate:
* Pandas
* Numpy
* Pyphen
  
### Syllabifying words

The most general function syllabifies a string of text into an output with individual syllables. It can be run from the main module,
`MAIN_execute.py`:

```python
>>> text = 'De nieuwsgierige man doorzocht de bibliotheek.'
>>> hyphenate_text(text)
'De nieuws-gie-ri-ge man door-zocht de bi-bli-o-theek.'
```

The `hyphenate_text` function supports non-alpha characters, however does not currently take into consideration special characters
when syllabifying (e.g., `é`)

A more specific function employed by `hyphenate_text` is `hyphenate_word`, which can also be used individually. It only supports
lower-case letter input, meaning any other input is better suited to use the `hyphenate_text` function.

```python
>>> word = 'barracuda'
>>> hyphenate_word(word)
'bar-ra-cu-da'
```
Without any additional parameters, `hyphenate_text` and `hyphenate_word` will automatically employ the optimal algorithm (Liang). 
Other algorithms can be manually selected by changing the `algo` parameter:

```python
>>> word = 'chocoladetaart'
>>> hyphenate_word(word, alg='b')
'cho-co-la-de-taart'
```

* **!Note!**  Syllabificator employs custom seperator patterns for the Liang algorithm. Pyphen is the current decoder used but it does not support external libraries. 
As a work-around, the file `dutch_cus_twee.dic` can be placed in the pyphen library index. If it is not present Pyphen will still work but default to the 
native Dutch pattern libraries instead.

Two algorithms have specific parameters that influence their syllabification. For `alg='l'` (which selects liang's algorithm), `pattern=x` 
where `x` is a value between 1 and 4 selects one of four default libraries. Currently, library 4 is the default.

For `alg='w'`, the number of comparisons with other words from the dictionary can be specified through `w_size=x`. If left empty, it will automatically 
select 2000 words to compare against. Note that a higher value means longer computation. The reference dictionary has about 290000 words listed. 
Setting the value to `w_size=290000` is optimal but may take several minutes to compute.

```python
>>> word = 'chocomel'
>>> hyphenate_word(word, alg='w', w_size=200)
'cho-co-me-l'
>>> hyphenate_word(word, alg='w', w_size=20000)
'cho-co-mel'
```

It should be noted that Weijters algorithm picks any random words to compare against, meaning repeated comparisons with smaller `w_size` are likely to produce
different results.

### Performing analyses

Syllabificator supports analyses comparing the output of different algorithms versus a correct solution. It displays a number of metrics, e.g., 
false positives, overall error rate and more. The `run_all` function simply takes an input list of correctly syllabized words (as a pandas series) 
and applies the different algorithms to them. Output is a table with the different relevant metrics.

```python
>>> sample_set = pd.read_csv('set_loan_hyphenated_sample.csv', header=None)
>>> sample_set = sample_set[0]  # Cast as series
>>> Me.run_all(sample_set, print_info=True)
'Please input name of dataset 1 (for display purposes):'
>>> Brandt
'Please input name of dataset 2 (for display purposes):'
>>> Liang
'Please input name of dataset 3 (for display purposes):'
>>> Weijters
'Processing...'
'           TP  FP  TN  FN  owe  swe    %ower   %swer   %oler   %sler'
'CORRECT    18   0  56   0    0    0    0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000'
'NO_HYPHEN   0   0  56  18    9    0  100.000   0.000  24.324   0.000'
'Brandt     16   2  54   2    2    2   22.222  22.222   5.405   2.703'
'Liang      18   0  56   0    0    0    0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000'
'Weijters   12  13  43   6    8    7   88.889  77.778  25.676  17.568'
```
The second analyses function `run_sets` performs identically, however takes lists of first a correctly hyphenated
reference set followed by x amounts of lists to check against. All lists are input as a pandas series with equal length:

```python
>>> sample_set = pd.read_csv('set_loan_hyphenated_sample.csv', header=None)
>>> sample_set = sample_set[0]
>>> chat_set = pd.read_csv('solutions_loan_chat_sample.csv', header=None)
>>> chat_set = chat_set[0]  # List of hyphenation solutions generated by an internal or external algorithm
>>> Me.run_sets(sample_set, chat_set)
'Please input name of dataset 1 (for display purposes):'
>>> Algo-x
'           TP  FP  TN  FN  owe  swe    %ower   %swer   %oler  %sler'
'CORRECT    18   0  56   0    0    0    0.000   0.000   0.000  0.000'
'NO_HYPHEN   0   0  56  18    9    0  100.000   0.000  24.324  0.000'
'Algo-x     16   1  55   2    2    1   22.222  11.111   4.054  1.351'
``
### Sample script

The default directory contains a sample script executing the above functions on different sample libraries. It is listed
as `sample_script.py` in the main directory

### Misc

Syllabificator is newly employed and not yet test-proof
